---
layout: post
title:  "A year of travel"
date: 2024-10-14 14:59:27 -0600
categories: personal
---

If you talked to me about traveling for the past 5 or 6 years (even before the pandemic started) I would often talk about how I didn't really see the point. So often I would find myself in a new place and I would end up doing the same things -- find a cool cafe, grab a nice coffee, walk around a bit, find a bar, have some beers, and maybe find a place to dance. It seems like wherever you go these days, be it Thessaloniki, Mumbai or Kyoto, there is a cafe that looks like a Scandanavian designer's living room -- sharp corners everywhere, brushed stainless steel, light colored wood tables and some ferns hanging around. You drink an absurdly sour espresso because apparently arming yourself with a refractometer does nothing to prevent pulling disgusting shots and ponder how you're having the same experience here that you had two months ago in Prague that you had last summer in Brooklyn that you had two years ago in Des Moines, Iowa. Is this the real endgame of globalization? Drinking under-roasted coffee in a mileau of subtle Earth tones and queerdos wearing oversized Carhart T-shirts [^queerdos]? 

Going to bars when I'm traveling leaves me with a similar feeling. Global culture has coallesced around a place that has a giant bench behind which bottles of alcohol are stored in shelves. This isn't interesting to me anymore. For me, there is no *exploration* at play when hopping from bar to bar in a new place, because it is, at its core, very much within my own comfort zone. When viewing traveling from the perspective of _what it can do for me_ (the perspective from which the vast majority of people I know, myself included, operate when traveling) the whole objective is to _explore_ and to _get uncomfortable_. Unless you're going to sit on the beach (which is absolutely worth it, by the way) traveling _should not be comfortable_ [^prescriptive]. Another thing that bars like to make me forget is that setting is largely irrelevant when it comes to goofing of with my friends. I don't care about how dimly lit a place is, or how much vinyl they play, or how much sand is on the floor, or how surly the bartender is. If I'm with friends, I can sit on stainless steel chairs underneath 200 Watts of florescent tube lighting with kaleidescope tables drinking warm Old Monk out of a paper cup we scrounged from the rubbish bin and _have the time of my life_. I carry within myself the ability to create or destroy the vibe. 

At the end of the day, going to a cafe or a bar is boring. Maybe stop drinking coffee, or drink some dirty sock water that tastes more like diesel fuel rather than an Ethipian Yirgacheffe thats been coddled from cherry to cup. Maybe stop drinking alcohol, or buy some palm wine in a plastic 2L bottle from a random dude on the side of the street, finishing it with him and a Lithuanian dude you met just yesterday. 

I feel like I should mention two coffee experiences I've had this year that have nudged me towards feeling a little less cyncial about cafes. The first is Subko Coffee Roasters in Mumbai, Maharashtra. Walking into one of their cafes, you might think that they're operating one of those Melbourne/Brooklyn/Berlin/wherever cafe replicas that have popped up all over the place. Under the hood those folks are doing something super radical. First, they only roast and serve Indian coffees. Second, they are doing wild shit with processing and roasting. They have done more to challenge and expand my idea of what coffee can taste like than any other coffee roaster I've sampled. I have tasted Subko coffees that would be _unacceptable_ to an American/Australian/European palette but are utterly delicious. They embrace flavors and textures that would be at home in Central/South Indian cuisine, but might be hard to find outside of that context. Fermented, fecund flavors like that of an overripe papaya, or tingly, sweet yet confusing bitter like a [jamun](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syzygium_cumini), or creamy and pungent like a [sitaphal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annona_squamosa). It's hard for me to describe because some of the things going on in the cup are so unfamiliar that I don't even have vocabulary to describe them. 

Second is a handful of cafes I went to recently in Japan. While the coffee itself wasn't particularly special, the environment and preparation method most definitely was. For example, in Kyoto we went to [Cafe Yamakawa](https://maps.app.goo.gl/TtbyiiQfiPh4VYTG8). They have a small roaster _on premise_ and they have as many as 20 different coffees to choose from. None of these coffees are particularly light roasted -- most are what I would consider to be medium to dark roast [^starbucks]. _They do not have an espresso machine_. They only make pourovers. You want coffee for you and your two friends? You have to wait for some middle aged woman to prepare three pourovers. It might take 10 minutes. The cafe itself invites you to sit and hang out, but not to lounge. It is not spartan, but rather full of random stuff, including notes from 2nd graders on the shelves (it seems that the owner went to a local elementery school to do a presentation on coffee), books, roasting supplies, and lots of coffee. The vibe is very much "sit down, enjoy your cup of coffee and then kindly get the hell out". It wouldn't occur to you to get out your laptop. This place was a refreshing departure from the MelBrooklin cafe vibe. They are very much doing specialty coffee, but without the accompanying aesthetic.

My cynicism around travel reached a crescendo sometime in 2022 or 2023. I found myself going to different places in Europe and instead of coming back feeling energized or excited, I would feel sad and sort of empty. I got to this point where I wondered if all the hassle was worth it (traveling entails a ton of hassle -- from taking airplanes to cleaning Airbnbs to smelling foreign farts, it can be a lot!). Over time, I've realized that what was lacking was some context and/or an emotional connection to the place. Prague is stunning, but I would rather spend time in Berlin because I'm endlessly fascinated by Berlin's history. It's not to say that Prague isn't imbued with countless fascinating histories, it's just that I haven't found one that resonates with me. Part of the reason why I feel so connected to Berlin is that my dad came here in the 1970s. I think he even flew into the now-defunct Tempelhof airport! Now that I live in Berlin, I often imagine the two of us walking the same streets, separated by almost 60 years. I can freely pass between the former West and East Berlins, but he had to cross a border. He tells me that him and his travel companions were made to wait over six hours at the border, while East Berlin guards searched and re-searched their tour bus. He tells me about the giant piles of rubble that still lined the streets, 25 years after the end of the war. He tells me about getting beers with his high school classmates on Kurfürstendamm in Charlottenburg and I scoff; I wouldn't be caught dead drinking on _Kurfürstendamm_! Then again, I'm sure they didn't tour Neukölln back then. His experiences here as a young man shaped the man that he became; it shaped the father that he is to me. Despite not being a Berliner, Berlin is part of my heritage. Even as my vision of the city morphs and normalizes as I live here, I feel a deep sentimental attachment to this place; my dad's heart beat here long before I was even a glimpse on the horizon, and if I listen closely, I feel that I can hear it. 

Something has been happening this year that has reignited my excitement for travel. The thing that changed is that I ended up going to places that I have some sort of connection to. In January I went to the UAE for a friend's wedding. We spent most of our time in Dubai, but a friend and I went to Abu Dhabi for a few days to explore some of our old haunts. I wrote about this earlier this year, but this trip was invigorating; life-affirming even. I have spent a long time learning how to speak some Hindi, and I feel like I got to properly exercise this muscle on the Creek in Dubai. I was amongst a ton of fellow HSL (Hindi as a second language) folks, and I felt confident in a way that I rarely feel when talking to native speakers. I felt the same way I do when I boop-bop around Mumbai on my own -- like my ability to speak some Hindi was allowing me to communicate more effectively with locals, and moreover that I was able to connect with people in a deeper-than-superficial manner. It felt like all that work that I had invested in learning the language was actually worth it. 

In March I went to India. I spent a couple of days in Mumbai, and I was reminded why I love the city (later on we spent a few days in Goa, which was also lovely!). Mumbai is not a tourist-friendly place. In fact, I would say that Mumbai is actively antagonistic towards foreign tourists. It is chaotic and messy on an epic scale. It is also fantastically beautiful, cosmopolitan, and delicious. When I went in March I really got the chance to put my Hindi skills to the test. I spent a few days galavanting around lower Mumbai with a US American friend, and I sort of played the role of tour guide. I chatted with tons of people, negotiated, and even yelled at a few autorickshaw drivers. Armed with this ability to somewhat effectively communicate, I felt more agency than I've ever felt there. This only intensified my fascination with the place. Mumbai is delightfully complex, and this complexity only deepens the more you discover about the place. My desire to communicate with people in Mumbai and thus attempt to make some sense of all the beauty and chaos around me is my connection to the city. 

I'm also in love with the way sunlight looks there. Some of the most romantic and sublime moments I've ever experienced have been at sunrise or sunset in Mumbai. The way light seems to hang suspended in the air in the late afternoon, golden and ephemeral, evokes in me the deepest sense of awe. One of my fondest memories of the city is taking the local train out to Matheran, a hill station situated just outside the city. It was 6 or 7 am, and the sun was just starting to rise, reminding you of how hot the day was going to be. Leaning out the open doors of the moving train, there was a moment when we passed through a miasma of agricultural smoke. For several seconds the sun become this ghostly orb hanging in this world without horizon. As the train trundled around a curve, we burst forth from the cloud of smoke, and the Earth and sky reappeared, the suns rays beaming dark orange onto my face, and those of my fellow travellers. The light had that same romantic hue that I associate with lazy late afternoons in Hiranandani.

In July I went to Thessaloniki in Greece. I was traveling with my partner for the first time. We had a lovely time, and they introduced me the idea of spending the whole day sitting on the beach. I have never had a vacation like this before, and it was frankly amazing. For two days in a row, we found some nice lounge chairs near the water and spent the whole day just sitting and doing absolutely nothing of consequence. We read books, chatted, had some beers, and swam in the water. Sometimes I would just sit there looking at the beautiful Aegean Sea. With no plans and nothing to do, my mind _unclenched_. Instead of going crazy with boredom, I actually found myself relaxing, in a very profound way. The other bit that was cool about Thessaloniki was all the old stuff. Generally speaking it's hard for me to get excited about seeing old buildings because I don't have any particular connection to the history. Notre Dame in Paris? Beautiful and very cool, but it doesn't really tug at my heartstrings. I don't have any _context_ for it; and if I'm being honest I'm not particularly curious about the context. Thessaloniki's Hagia Sofia, however? Oh man did that get me excited. I was practically jumping up and down! I think this again has to do with my dad. I have fond memories of him cracking open this ancient art history textbook (made before the advent of digital printing, he'd always point out) to show me all these cool Byzantine churches. The guy was giddy telling me about all the mosaics contained within. I think his random passion for Byzantine era churches rubbed off on me; I snapped tons of photos, eager to show him that I saw one of the churches from that textbook _in real life_! 

In September/October I went to Japan with two of my closest friends. We spent ten or eleven days exploring Tokyo, Nagoya and Kyoto. One of my friends is from Japan, and he was able to help communicate with people and navigate us around. We saw lots of temples and shrines, drank a lot (not really my thing these days) and ate. We ate so much incredible food. Japan feels pretty inaccessible to foreign tourists. Mumbai is inaccessible because it's difficult to get around town, its chaotic, and it can be difficult to figure out if people are trying to scam you. That said, most people speak some degree of English, so communication is possible. Moreover, most signs have both Marathi/Hindi _and_ English on them, so it's easy to understand what stores are selling, or what's happening with a menu. In Japan, we encountered far fewer people who spoke English, and there was very little Latin-alphabet text present when moving around. It feels like a place that is optimized for getting around in Japanese (which makes sense!), with very little attention paid to what a non-Japanese speaking traveler's experience might be. To be clear, I don't have any problem with this. I don't feel that any place has an obligation to cater to tourists. If I'm being honest with myself (and I feel a little embarassed to admit this) I sort of like it when places don't cater to foreign tourists. It heightens my sense that I'm somewhere _different_ from where I'm coming from. It also increases the chances that there won't be a ton of other tourists around. Again, I don't necessarily have any problem with being around other tourists, it's just a little weird when I encounter a family from Iowa City walking around Kyoto. Japan's inaccessibility made it exciting for me. Going to the convenience store felt like an adventure, not just because of all the incredible food and drink but because it meant interacting with a person who didn't speak English or trying to navigate some Point of Sale system that was completely inscrutable if you don't speak Japanese. More than anything, the thing that made traveling to Japan exciting was doing it with two of my closest friends in the whole world. Waking up a little hungover and knowing that I don't have to despair because I would get to spend the day hanging with two of my best buds? I haven't experienced that since I was in university. 

I'm excited to do more traveling in 2025. Hopefully I'll go to Rwanda to visit one of my friends from university. Maybe I'll go to Senegal, Mexico or Brazil. Maybe I'll make my way back to India. One thing that I think is important to emphasize is that I'm sort of conceiving of traveling as something that is meant for _my_ enjoyment or enrichment. I talk about being able to speak more Hindi as cool for me because it allows me to better communicate with the people I encounter in Mumbai or Dubai. I'm not talking about what, if anything, my presence means for the people I encounter there. What happens when hundreds or thousands of folks like me start moving through those spaces? Does it affect how people engage with their own homes? I'm talking here about economic, demographic or cultural repercussions or even benefits. The question that I keep coming back to is whether I'm engaging in a purely extractive enterprise. What would it look like to travel in a way that wasn't so self-centered? 


[^queerdos]: queerdo = queer + weirdo. I proudly count myself as one of those queerdos! 
[^prescriptive]: I generally try to stay away from being prescriptive, and at the end of the day, I think people should do what they want so long as they're not hurting others. I'm trying to describe some observations about what brings me more joy than despair when traveling. 
[^starbucks]: What I would call a dark roast is Starbuck's lightest roast. Their darkest roast is what I would call "Charcoal in the shape of a coffee bean".
